.gitlab-ci/README.md, before:

# CI support stuff

## Docker image

GitLab CI jobs run in a Docker image, defined here. To update that image
(perhaps to install some more packages):

1. Edit `.gitlab-ci/Dockerfile` with the changes you want
1. Run `.gitlab-ci/run-docker.sh build --base=debian-stable --base-version=1` to
   build the new image (bump the version from the latest listed for that `base`
   on https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/glib/container_registry)
1. Run `.gitlab-ci/run-docker.sh push  --base=debian-stable --base-version=1` to
   upload the new image to the GNOME GitLab Docker registry
    * If this is the first time you're doing this, you'll need to log into the
      registry
    * If you use 2-factor authentication on your GNOME GitLab account, you'll
      need to [create a personal access token][pat] and use that rather than
      your normal password — the token should have `read_registry` and
      `write_registry` permissions
1. Edit `.gitlab-ci.yml` (in the root of this repository) to use your new
   image

[pat]: https://gitlab.gnome.org/profile/personal_access_tokens

Commit message:

ci: Support building a CI image for Coverity Scan builds
This will be used in an upcoming scheduled CI job.

Signed-off-by: Philip Withnall <withnall@endlessm.com>

.gitlab-ci/README.md, after:

# CI support stuff

## Docker image

GitLab CI jobs run in a Docker image, defined here. To update that image
(perhaps to install some more packages):

1. Edit `.gitlab-ci/Dockerfile` with the changes you want
1. Run `.gitlab-ci/run-docker.sh build --base=debian-stable --base-version=1` to
   build the new image (bump the version from the latest listed for that `base`
   on https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/glib/container_registry). If rebuilding the
   `coverity.Dockerfile` image, you’ll need to have access to [Coverity Scan][cs]
   and will need to specify your project name and access token as the environment
   variables `COVERITY_SCAN_PROJECT_NAME` and `COVERITY_SCAN_TOKEN`.
1. Run `.gitlab-ci/run-docker.sh push  --base=debian-stable --base-version=1` to
   upload the new image to the GNOME GitLab Docker registry
    * If this is the first time you're doing this, you'll need to log into the
      registry
    * If you use 2-factor authentication on your GNOME GitLab account, you'll
      need to [create a personal access token][pat] and use that rather than
      your normal password — the token should have `read_registry` and
      `write_registry` permissions
1. Edit `.gitlab-ci.yml` (in the root of this repository) to use your new
   image

[pat]: https://gitlab.gnome.org/profile/personal_access_tokens
[cs]: https://scan.coverity.com/
